.TH MYPGM 1 "today" "1.2.3"
.\" ========================================================
.SH NAME
.B pathfind \(em find files in a directory path
.\" ========================================================
.SH SYNOPSIS
[
.B \-\^\-all
]
[
.B \-\^\-?
]
[
.B \-\^\-help
]
[
.B \-\^\-version
]
.
.\" Why the next request?{{{
.\"
.\" Despite the previous  line breaks, everything so far will  fit on one single
.\" typeset line.
.\"
.\" From `info '(groff)Implicit Line Breaks'`.
.\"
.\"    > An important concept in 'gtroff' is the "break".  When a break occurs,
.\"    > 'gtroff' outputs the partially filled line (unjustified), and resumes
.\"    > collecting and filling text on the next output line.
.\"
.\" But, by experiment, we can find that the nroff ASCII output has a line break
.\" after  the `--version`  option,  and the  next line  continues  at the  left
.\" margin.
.\"
.\" That is undesirable:  conventionally, a text line should  always start after
.\" some indentation.
.\" So we  put in  a conditional statement  that applies only  to nroff,  and is
.\" ignored by troff.
.\"}}}
.\" What's its effect?{{{
.\"
.\" The indentation of the next line of text will be increased.
.\"}}}
.\"
.\" What's `.if`?{{{
.\"
.\" The equivalent of an `if` statement in other languages.
.\"
.\" Synopsis:
.\"
.\"     .if EXPR ANYTHING
.\"
.\" Evaluate EXPR,  and execute  ANYTHING (the  remainder of  the line)  if EXPR
.\" evaluates to a value greater than zero (true).
.\"
.\" For more info: `info '(groff)if-else'`.
.\"}}}
.\"     the following `n`?{{{
.\"
.\" An expression that  evaluates to True if the document  is being processed in
.\" nroff mode (i.e., the `.nroff` command has been issued).
.\"
.\" For more info: `info '(groff)Operators in Conditionals'`.
.\"}}}
.\"     `.ti`?{{{
.\"
.\" Synopses:
.\"
.\"     .ti  offset
.\"     .ti +offset
.\"     .ti -offset
.\"
.\" Temporarily indent the next output line by OFFSET.
.\" If  an increment  or  decrement  value is  specified,  adjust the  temporary
.\" indentation relative to the value set by the 'in' request.
.\" The default scaling indicator (measurement unit) is 'm'.
.\"}}}
.\"     `+9n`?{{{
.\"
.\" It stands for an incrementation of the indentation by a width of nine 'n' units.
.\"
.\" 'n' is half of 'm'.
.\" And 'm' is equal to the current font size in points, which is
.\" *approximately* the width of the letter 'm' in the current font.
.\"
.\" For more info: `info '(groff)Measurements'`.
.\"}}}
.\"        but why 9?{{{
.\"
.\" This is the width of the command  name, `pathfind`, plus a trailing space,
.\" in a fixedwidth font (i.e. a font whose characters have all the same width).
.\"}}}
.if n .ti +9n
.
.\" What would the next request do if I uncommented it?{{{
.\"
.\" It would increase the  indentation of the next typeset line  by the width of
.\" the text `pathfind `.
.\"}}}
.\" Why is it commented?{{{
.\"
.\" The current synopsis is short enough to  fit on a single typeset line, so we
.\" don't need it for troff atm.
.\"}}}
.\" When will it be needed?{{{
.\"
.\" After you add new options to your `pathfind` command, and that, as a result,
.\" the synopsis doesn't fit on a single line anymore.
.\"}}}
.\" What's a basic unit?{{{
.\"
.\" It's a  device dependent measurement,  ranging from  1/75th to 2000th  of an
.\" inch; it's represented by a 'u'.
.\"}}}
.
.\" What's `t` after `.if`?{{{
.\"
.\" An expression that  evaluates to True if the document  is being processed in
.\" troff mode (i.e., the `.troff` command has been issued).
.\"}}}
.\"     `\w'...'u`?{{{
.\"
.\" It's an escape sequence, documented at `info '(groff)Page Motions'`.
.\" It evaluates to  the width of the  text `pathfind `, the text  being in bold
.\" except the trailing space.
.\"
.\" ---
.\"
.\" Synopsis: \w'text'
.\"
.\" Return the width of the specified TEXT in basic units.
.\" This allows  horizontal movement based on  the width of some  arbitrary text
.\" (e.g. given as an argument to a macro).
.\"
.\" For example, if you write in your groff document:
.\"
.\"     The length of the string 'abc' is \w'abc'u.
.\"
.\" The typeset line will print sth like:
.\"
.\"     The length of the string 'abc' is 13880u.
.\"
.\" Font changes may occur in TEXT, which don't affect current settings.
.\"}}}
.\"     `\fB` and `\fP`?{{{
.\"
.\" Because the  text is  set in  a bold font,  we use  an inline  font wrapper,
.\" `\fB...\fP`;  it switches  to a  bold font,  and then  switches back  to the
.\" previous font.
.\"
.\" There are similar font-switching commands for roman (`\fR`), italic (`\fI`),
.\" and  fixed-width (`\fC`)  fonts; the  C stands  for Courier,  a widely  used
.\" fixed-width font dating back to the days of manual type writers.
.\"}}}
.\"     .if t .ti +\w'\fBpathfind\fP 'u
